---
layout: post
title:  "Bottom-up organisational health and the value of reflection"
date:   2019-04-02 02:04:19 +0000
categories: dev
excerpt: "We should incorporate reflection in our toolbox at work to have healthier teams and healthier organisations."
---
In the age of globalization and hypercompetition, leaders are becoming increasingly aware of how much the health of their organisation impacts the bottom line of their business. There is a lot of focus on conceptualizing and measuring organisational health in order to guide improvements. Companies like [McKinsey][McKinseyOHI] do great work in this space while [Great Place to Work][GreatPlace] has become a well-known brand in many job markets. The trend, as befits the age of data, is to employ ample surveys to produce health metrics and then to effect change from the top-down.

We would be mistaken to neglect, however, the complementary bottom-up perspective. Organisational health is shaped just as much at the grassroots by each and every team. A culture of taking ownership from within and investing in the health of our own team is as important to overall organisational health as solid high-level strategy. And it just makes sense for our own well-being. We would be equally mistaken to neglect the softer tools at our disposal, such as reflection. Data from well-designed surveys is a useful piece of input when we look at our team's health but it has an inevitable averaging effect on the wealth of personal and collective experiences that we live. In that space, outliers are sometimes more relevant than the average, the exceptions can be the pattern and details may hold important insight. Reflection is better at exploring this landscape meanwhile the survey method is good at revealing trends and hinting at the general direction.

## Reflection

It's not something about which we spend a lot of time thinking. That would be very meta. But if we did, most of us would realize that in the course of a day we barely have time to reflect about anything. We live at a gallop, our work day is as busy as ever, we never seem to spend as much time as we'd like with our family and friends, and ubiquitous technology fills every idle moment we have with texts, tweets, podcasts and videos. The good news is that there is an opposing trend gaining momentum. Critical reflection is being recognized more and more as an important component in learning. Mindful reflection is becoming increasingly popular as a well-being practice. And I argue here that we should incorporate reflection in our toolbox at work to have healthier teams and healthier organisations.

Reflection is more generally defined as the conscious examination of one's own thoughts, emotions, feelings and actions. In learning, it's defined as a reasoning process that makes meaning from experiences and is presumed to be collective as well as individual. Both definitions are useful when we work on team health. Our team is only as healthy as ourselves, our relationships and the ways in which we work. We should take time individually to reflect on our own health at work - our mental, emotional and physical well-being, our needs, our goals. We should reflect as well on our interactions, whether they have positive or negative effects on ourselves, on our colleagues and on the work we do. And of course we should reflect on how we work, whether we put to use our time, effort, qualities and skills in a meaningful, effective and rewarding way. Similarly, we should take time as a team to share our individual reflections, to reflect collectively on shared experiences and make each other aware of different viewpoints, to identify dysfunctionalities and agree on ways to improve, to celebrate and reinforce the aspects that are indeed healthy and work well.

All of this is a time investment, of course, so we have to make good use of our own and of our team's time. Self-reflection is not mind wandering, and collective reflection is not rambling. Reflection implies a level of discipline and structure, it's an exploratory yet focused reasoning process. For example, from the paragraph above you can get an intuition of one way in which I slice my mental model of team health: Me, Us and Work. So reflecting at the end of my work day I could perhaps approach each area in turn and "scan" it, "triaging" for meaningful emotions or events. I would then focus on each of those in turn and assess whether they are healthy or unhealthy, what are their effects, what caused them, are they part of a pattern, is there any nuance that I've missed in real-time, how do we improve or, if it's something positive, do more of it, and finally what's the best way to share this reflection with my the team. 

Now, every one of us would find what works for him or her and with practice the thought process would become natural. Likewise, each team would agree on a structure for sharing their reflections and reflecting together. The important thing is getting off auto-pilot and making the cognitive effort and the time investment in assessing, monitoring and improving the health of our team for the benefit of our organisation, of our colleagues and most importantly, our own.

[McKinseyOHI]: https://www.mckinsey.com/solutions/orgsolutions/overview/organizational-health-index
[GreatPlace]: https://www.greatplacetowork.com/solutions/employee-surveys